# Automatic classification of MR scans in multiple sclerosis and neuromyelitis optica : a multi-voxel pattern classification study
_limit=2500 characters_
***
Early discrimination between neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and multiple sclerosis (MS) is important to plan treatment strategies that are considerably different. Fundamentally different pathology underlies gray matter (GM) damage in each disorder, which underscores its potential as a biomarker. To detect _in vivo_ pattern of GM changes , multi-voxel pattern classification is a promising method. This new method is more powerful than classical voxel-based morphometry (VBM) studies, and can show complex patterns of change which are not detectable by VBM.

Here, we included 97 subjects from two centers in Tehran (25 MS and 30 NMO patients) and London __??Is data from London??__ (21 patients with NMO and 24 with MS), with a mean disease duration of (NMO-London =7.48, MS-London=8.08, NMO-Tehran=6.07, MS-Tehran =8.04 years), median EDSS of (NMO-London=4.5, MS-London=4, NMO-Tehran =3, MS-Tehran= 2.5) , and mean age of (NMO-London=42.48, MS-London=36.04, NMO-Tehran=33.58, MS-Tehran=32.85).

Subjects underwent imaging sessions (3T in Tehran and __??__ in London) which included high resolution T1-weighted scans, FLAIR and T2-weighted scans. To extract GM probability maps we performed pre-processing steps as follows inside ANTs software: 1) Bias-field correction on T1 scans 2) Binary lesion segmentation on FLAIR images 3)filling white matter hypo-intense lesions in T1 images 3) study specific template construction from T1 scans with balanced numbers of subjects from each cohort and each disease 4) GM segmentation 5) diffeomorphic registration of all subjects' GM maps to study specific template. Next, all normalized GM probability maps were randomly assigned into two sets of train (n=49) and test (n=48). To avoid bias, we re-iterated this procedure for 1000 times, shuffling patients between groups. Each time a predicting model (support vector machine or SVM) was trained on the first set with voxels of GM probability map as features to learn. Next, for each iteration we applied trained model on the test set to assess its performance.

Average accuracy(± standard deviation) for all iterations was 84% (± 0.09) with GM maps, and 87% (± 0.10) when including WM lesion load in addition to GM maps. Most important brain regions (highest SVM weights) were the bilateral hippocampi and insula. 

In conclusion, we showed that grey matter changes as captured by MRI could be used for automatic differentiation between MS and NMO. Our results have important implications for novel diagnostic approaches in future.
